If I took the trays of embryos that
contain you and your husband's
embryionic children and I threw them in
the river, what kind of crime have I
committed? Have I committed a property
crime? Like, should I pay a fine? Like,
what have I done?
>> So, are you saying that you want to
criminalize IVF and that you should ban
IVF? Is that your stance?
[Music]
How will technology change the way human
beings reproduce
in the future? Will everyone use IVF?
What are the costs and benefits of
trying to engineer our own children?
My guest today is the founder of a
Silicon Valley startup that promises
would be parents a new level of genetic
screening for their embryos and that
looks forward to a future where most
embryos and therefore most babies are
screened and selected in advance.
Nor Sadiki, welcome to interesting
times.
>> Thank you so much for having me. So, I
want to start uh by talking about what
it is that your company, Orchid, does
and promises. And I thought I'd try and
do that by presenting myself to you as a
prospective client. Uh now, this will
require a little bit of imagination
since I'm actually a 45year-old man who
has many children. But let's imagine for
the sake of this conversation that my
wife and I are about 30 years old. We're
healthy, not to our knowledge,
infertile. We want to start a family,
but we've read that genetic testing is
advancing rapidly. Uh, like most people,
we have some medical issues on either
side of the family tree, and we're
interested in doing right by our
potential offspring. So, we come to you
guys to Orchid for, I guess, a
consultation.
What do you tell us that you offer?
>> Yeah. So what orchid can do is it gives
parents the power to protect their
children before pregnancy begins. So
what happens today in IVF centers is
that um you know they're operating
essentially almost blind, right? So this
really really critical decision about
which embryo to transfer happens with um
extremely limited information. And so
what happens is that the embryo that
looks best under the microscope kind of
wins this morphology beauty contest uh
is often the one that's selected. Um
other times there's a very limited
genetic test that's offered that looks
at a tiny fraction of genetic diseases
that could affect a future baby. So um
Orchid completely changes that. We're
the first company in the world that
allows parents to actually sequence the
entire genome of an embryo. also
sequence 99%
uh of the bases in an embryo's genome
which allows parents to detect risks for
some of the most serious conditions. So,
heart defects, birth defects, pediatric
cancers, um developmental disorders,
things that are um you know massively uh
change the trajectory of a child's life.
Um the vast majority of these um
diseases don't have cures. Um so what's
really exciting about this possibility
is that um you know now parents have
this ability to protect their children
uh from an entire category of disease
that um you know previously we had to
just hope for the best and wish that um
you know our our children wouldn't be
affected by them
>> and just since it's going to be
important to the larger conversation you
know one of your views I think is that
this kind of testing and this kind of
process isn't just for people who are
older parents or who have super high
risk factors or who are struggling to
conceive. Right. Your argument is this
is potentially for everyone who wants to
protect their kids from these kind of
conditions. And so what that's right,
right, that you you would so you would
say to me as healthy 30-year-old male
with a healthy wife like we should
consider doing this, right?
I think that, you know, no one should
ever be pressured into uh any decision,
especially a medical one. So, I would
say it's the same as, you know, uh, you
giving women the opportunity to choose
an epidural or not, to choose a home
birth versus a hospital birth. Um, I
think these are, you know, incredibly
intimate, uh, and personal decisions.
And I do think that it should be part of
the menu of choice and everyone uh
should consider it, but obviously, you
know, no one should be compelled or
coerced to do it,
>> right? No, I wouldn't I wouldn't assume
that you would be locking us in in the
room, but you would but you would be
presenting it as a reasonable option for
someone in our position to consider.
>> Yeah. Yeah, definitely. I think it's
something that that every parent should
consider. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. So then, so let's So we're
interested. We decide to pursue your
process.
>> What what happens next? We go through a
cycle of IVF and produce some number of
embryos, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So, for people who
um you know aren't super familiar with
IVF, the way that it works is that
you're on medication for you know 10 to
14 days, what that medication does is it
actually synchronizes the follicles in
your ovaries. So, what IVF does is it
captures those eggs. And if you're
familiar with egg freezing, egg freezing
and IVF are actually identical
processes. The question is just when you
have those eggs at the at that
retrieval, that happens, you know,
typically on day between 12 to 14. Um
you know, what do you do with those
eggs? Do you go ahead and freeze them or
do you fertilize them with uh with with
your partner's sperm? So once you
fertilize them with your partner's
sperm, those embryos grow for 5 days. Um
so on day five, they typically have
about 125 cells. And um you know, if you
choose to use orchid, five of those
cells get sent to Orchid's lab. So the
procedure to actually sample cells from
embryos, you can kind of think of it as
like a haircut. Um you know, the embryo
has a outer membrane called the
trafectadorm. Those are the cells that
are actually sampled. And um basically
what's really powerful about Orchid is
that you know instead of getting that
really tiny amount of genetic
information, you're able to actually get
the entire genome um 100 times the data
and then use that to make these really
important decisions.
>> And this is called whole genome
amplification, right? That process
>> it's called Yeah, it's called whole
genome sequencing. And the first part of
whole genome sequencing is
amplification. So amplification means uh
you're copying DNA, right? If you have a
blood or saliva sample, there's no
there's no need for amplification
because the minimum quantity of DNA that
you need is already there. You basically
lice those cells, you break open those
cells, you take the DNA in the nucleus,
and you have uh enough DNA to just throw
it on a sequencer. So, what we've
invented is a new protocol for
amplification, a new way to copy DNA so
that you get um yeah, really high
uniformity of coverage. Um so, you get
really high quality data off of that
really small sample size. And you're the
And you're the first company to to do to
do this at all to do it commercially.
>> Yeah, we're the first company to uh
clinically validate it. We're able to do
it on embryos um at comparable quality
to to blood saliva and that hasn't been
possible before.
>> Okay. So, we decide to go forward,
>> my sp my spouse and I um so we do the
IVF cycle. We have what would be a
typical number of embryos then
>> that we're testing. How how old how old
are you and how old are you?
>> We're 30. We're 30 in this in this
hypothetical. We're 30.
>> Um yeah, I mean honestly so uh for me I
got um 20 eggs and I got uh 16 embryos
and I was I think 28.
>> Yeah. So so let's say Yeah. Let's say we
have 16. We have 16 embryos. Okay.
>> So uh what happens is that um of those
16 embryos you take five cells at day
five. they get sent to orchids lab and
then we come back to you in you know 3
to four weeks with uh reports on each of
your embryos. So then a genetic
counselor, someone who's an expert on
genetics will meet with you and your
partner and then you guys will kind of
go through the risks of each embryo and
then make a decision um you know between
you and your doctor about which one you
actually want to go go forward with an
implant and then that implantation will
hopefully be successful and lead to a
pregnancy.
>> How many conditions are you doing scores
for?
Yeah,
>> for each embryo.
>> Yeah. So, it's kind of helpful to kind
of um go through all the different
analysis that happens. So, the first
layer of testing is chromosomal
analysis, right? So, chromosomes, you
can kind of think of them as like
chapters in a book, right? So, that's
usually where um you know, that's where
genetic testing that's kind of
widespread today during IVF stops,
right? So that's kind of akin to, you
know, if you had a proofreader for your
book and the only thing that they're
able to tell you is, hey, your book has
an extra missing chapter, right? Like
that's not very good. You'd obviously
want to be able to, you know, check for
typos, check for, you know, are all the
all the sentences capitalized, and do
they have a period, right? So that's
kind of the level of resolution that
orchids able to go. It's it's be able to
actually read every single gene, look
for typos that um could lead to diseases
in in, you know, each of those genes.
>> Yeah. So that's the first first stage.
So go on. Yeah. Yes. The first stage is
um you know chromosomeal analysis,
right? So does the embryo have the
correct or incorrect number of
chromosomes, right? Then the next stage
is monogenic analysis. So that's where
we're looking for over 1,200 monogenic
disorders. So these are things like
birth defects, heart defects, skeletal
defects. These are pediatric cancers,
adult onset cancers. These are um
neurodedevelopmental disorders. These
are where you know over the last 20 20
years geneticists have cataloged hey
there's this specific gene a specific
variant and it leads to this disorder.
>> So these these are monogenetic right. So
the you're talking about you're looking
for problems that are caused pretty
clearly by a single gene. How many of
these kind of kind of things did you say
you're testing for?
>> It's a little bit over 1200 conditions.
>> Okay. So 1,200. Then what about the next
level which is polygenic conditions
which are and these are conditions that
then are influenced by multiple genes
right and you're testing for those as
well.
>> Yep. Yeah. Exactly. I just I think it's
I think it's just really important not
to skip over this monogenic side because
currently um you know you can't test for
those for that large of a um set of
monogenic diseases during pregnancy. So
what's offered today is just something
called NIPT. So at you know 10 to 12
weeks you can get down syndrome
screening or chromosomal screening and
um you know women are in a really
difficult position right because if that
test is positive if you know that um you
know it you know down syndrome is
detected they only the only choice that
they have at that moment is either to
terminate that pregnancy or to proceed
versus being able to give that
information at the earliest possible
stage before a pregnancy has even
started. um you know avoids uh you know
families having to make that really
difficult decision. So in so in these
cases these the the monogenic conditions
>> you know because obviously I have some
familiarity with testing during
pregnancy and you know part of what
comes with that is a really wide error
range right where you get lots of false
positives when you're talking about
monogenic results what is your level of
confidence in these results
>> the the testing for uh chromosomes and
monogenic screening is um I would say
very strong right you're talking about
you know 99 plus uh% accuracy uh
sensitivity and precision kind of in
that same uh ballpark. So you're really
you're getting the same level of
performance as you would on blood or
saliva. So um those are those are very
very strong indicators but at the same
time any embryo testing any testing on
embryos period is still a screening test
right until that that baby is actually
born you can't give a definitive
diagnosis because you know you don't
have an actual you know human being in
front of you. Um but in terms of the um
you know accuracy of the testing it's
it's very high. We actually also um do
another layer of confirmation called uh
Sanger sequencing. So basically we use
two different technologies to confirm
that a variant is has been uh detected
before we actually go report it out to
parents and and their clinical team.
>> Okay. And then polygenic testing. What
is that?
>> Yeah. So we kind of talked about
monogenic disease. um you know that's uh
you know very prevalent but there's a
there's a sort of a onetoone mapping
between hey this variant leads to this
disease. So for a lot of diseases that
um you know you might be familiar with
the things like bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, heart disease, diabetes,
they're not driven by you know just one
genetic typo. They're driven sort of by
the cumulative impact of many millions
of variants collectively driving risk.
So what's really interesting uh that's
happened over the last um decade or so
is that um genetic data sets have gotten
very very large. So we now have both
sequence data and medical records from
really really large numbers of people.
And what that allows us to do is to
build models where we can actually
quantify genetic risk or genetic genetic
susceptibility to disease. Um so what
that you know means on a practical level
for embryos is that um you know for
example you know I'm South Asian we have
uh you know unfortunately incredibly
high rates of uh you know heart disease
and heart attacks were sort of twice as
likely to die um as other ethnicities
right so I don't want my child to be at
high risk um you know for heart disease
just because that's you know I'm
predisposed to that. So what um you know
orchid and genetic risk scores allow you
to do is to quantify genetic
susceptibility for each embryo. So what
we'll actually tell you in the in our
reports is it'll tell you um you know
what is the actual percentile of risk.
So is this embryo in the 99th percentile
of risk? Okay, what does that actually
map to? Does that mean that embryo is
four times as likely 15 times as likely
to develop the disease? And then what is
their absolute risk of the disease?
>> But those can be quite different, right?
an embryo could be in the 98th
percentile of risk for an extremely rare
condition, but the odds would be that it
did not have that condition, right?
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Of course. I mean,
basically, you know, that's why we why
we report all three numbers that people
can get a really solid grasp of, you
know, what the risks looks like, right?
Because
>> it is important to understand, you know,
at a population level, you know, how
high risk is this embryo? Are they in
99th percentile or not? But of course,
the absolute risk is really critical to
understand too, right? if the baseline
risk for that disease is is low, um
people who even have a family history um
you know might be less activated or less
concerned about it. Right? So we're
trying to provide parents sort of the
fullest possible picture of you know how
significant this risk is for for their
future child.
>> And how many conditions are you testing
for in the polygenic screening?
>> Uh I think it's about 12 12 to 12 to 15.
Yeah.
>> Okay. So most of most of the score most
of what the results you're delivering
are for monogenic conditions and then
there's 12 to 15 conditions that are
polygenic. Okay, that's that's helpful.
Now, do those embryos get like a kind of
collective score, right? Because you're
dealing you're giving people, you know,
obviously hopefully they're passing the
monogenic screening as you're describing
it, but then you're giving people scores
for a bunch of different diseases,
right? So is there a sense of like you
know this embryo clearly stands out as
the healthiest or is it just like no
we're going to walk through each disease
and tell you your risk factor there and
I as the you know prospective parent
have to just sort of decide based on
that how do you present the data
>> yeah so the way the data is presented is
um yeah the kind of the way that I
described right so basically embryos
will be positive or negative for those
chromosomeal abnormalities they'll be
positive or negative for those 1,200 um
monogenic disorders and then they'll
have sort of a elevated or normal score
um for each of those um genetic risk
scores or those polygenic conditions.
So, it's kind of funny that you
mentioned that people actually often ask
for like, oh, can you just like collapse
everything into one score? Um you know,
there's been a lot of different things
tossed around of like, you know, would
you want to use dailies like disability
adjusted life years or some sort of
thing like that? And um it's just I I
don't think that's really um
it hasn't seemed like that would be
super useful to the parents that um are
are using the product.
>> So in practice, you just you have an
embryo and you say embryo A has an
elevated score on these three conditions
and a normal score on the others. Embryo
B has an elevated score on these two
conditions. Embryo C has no elevated
scores. And then that's that's how the
parents sort of see the data.
Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. That's that's the
way it's collapsed. But obviously again
all of that detail in terms of you know
the absolute risk, relative risk and the
percentile is also um in there. It's
just that I guess I guess to kind of
walk you through it. I mean I would say
people are coming at it from a couple of
angles, right? Some people are coming,
you know, they have a specific condition
that they're affected by, that their
partner is affected by, that the parent
that they're a caregiver for for has
been affected by, or, you know, a child
like a first child has been affected by,
and they want to mitigate risk, and they
come, they're coming in with a very
specific concern. That's one category.
And then there's sort of another
category, um, which is people who just
want to mitigate the maximum amount of
risk, right? So there's not maybe one
specific concern. Um but they basically
see this as hey this is sort of the most
significant way that I'm going to be
able to shape my child's health. So I
want to understand everything that's
well understood and then um just
minimize uh the the the genetic risk
that my child will um end up with.
>> And how I I know I think the first baby
screened by Orchid was born in 2023. Is
that right?
>> I think so. Yeah. So, how many So, how
many people how many people have used
your service and how many babies just as
a guesstimate have been born at this
point?
>> Huh? Yeah. I don't know. It's honestly
um pretty hard to say because we're kind
of like a blood testing company, you
know what I mean? People will come to us
and, you know, get their embryos tested,
but uh they might not not necessarily
come back to us and say, "Hey, you know,
we're pregnant." And, you know,
>> how many how many people have had their
embryos tested with you? Ballpark.
Uh, we don't we don't really talk about
that publicly, but you know, it's it's
in the it's in the thousands.
>> It's in the thousands, but not the tens
of thousands.
>> I we don't talk about publicly. Um, and
you know, your clientele, I know
obviously you also don't talk about
specific people publicly, so I don't
expect you to comment on the reports
that Elon Musk and I guess one of his
partners used Orchid. Generally what you
said before is like you're dealing with
a clientele that is partially people who
have family histories of serious genetic
disorders and partially people who are
what sort of cutting edgeminded Silicon
Valley types like what's the part of the
clientele that is sort of coming to you
the way that myself as a hypothetical
client is coming to you who who are
those people
>> um
>> make a make make one generalization
about those people just
Yeah, I think I think that it's um
>> I don't know. I just I feel like to be
totally honest, I think it's just
dishonest to try to flatten uh the set
of people who are using the product. I
mean, really, it's an incredibly uh
diverse set of people. I mean, it's
people from, you know, incredibly modest
means who have had to, you know, bury a
child due to a genetic disease. It's
from people who are, you know, very
affluent. It's people who are, you know,
much younger, people who are much older.
It's from, you know, gay couples. It's,
you know, single mothers by choice. It's
like kind of every type of family um has
expressed interest in the product. And I
think honestly that's why I'm excited
about building the company and building
the product is because it's something
that you know everyone wants to protect
their child. Everyone wants their child
to be you know healthy and to have the
maximum amount of opportunity and um
>> Okay, that's a that's a good answer. So
a couple personal things, right? You've
you've already mentioned uh that you've
used this technology yourself, right?
So, you have, you said 16 embryos
currently with your with your with your
husband.
>> Um,
>> and how many of those are you planning
to implant?
>> Yeah, we honestly haven't. Um,
>> you haven't ever had a conversation
about it. I don't believe you.
>> We haven't made any decisions yet,
right? So, I think I've I've mentioned
that um, you know, I'd be really excited
to be able to have four kids. I know
you're you're already beating my wildest
dreams. you already have five of your
own. So, very impressive. Um, but yeah,
I think um, you know, I'm Yeah, we're
we're super excited about, you know,
multiple of those embryos. We want to
have two boys and two girls.
>> So, you would So, you would select So,
you would select two male and two female
embryos, right?
>> In that in that case, right? Yeah.
>> In order to get
>> in order to get Well, in order to get
No, you right. You Yeah. Okay. Um, and
how old are you?
>> I'm 31.
>> You're 31. So, but you when when do you
think you'll have your first kid?
I got to, you know, chat with my husband
about that. It's not a
>> Okay. All right. Well, we can we can
have we can have we can have we can have
you both back. Second person second
personal question. So, you've mentioned
in a number of interviews that you were
inspired to um get into this field and
focus on it because of your mother's
experience. Can you talk a little bit
about that?
>> Yeah. So, growing up, um you know, my
mom got a pretty uh you know, pretty
devastating diagnosis. She um you know
she started by losing her night vision
then she lost her peripheral vision and
then slowly she started losing her
central vision. So um she ended up
getting diagnosed with a condition
called retinitis pigmentotosa. So what
that means is that you sort of
progressively go blind and it was a you
know pretty long odyssey to actually get
that diagnosis and then there was a lot
of fear around okay is that going to
affect um you know her siblings my aunts
and uncles is it going to affect us or
children and um you know really kind of
what I was obviously very young when a
lot of this was happening.
>> How old how old was she when this sort
of manifest itself? So I think the first
symptoms that I think she had admitted
to at least you know my dad were
probably in her early 30s and then I
think um maybe in her mid-30s is when
kind of
>> um he pushed her enough to be like hey I
think this is something that you know
you should you should really be uh you
know looking into um and I think that uh
you know really what um you know sat
with me and left um and and what I felt
through that experience was just um this
sort of profound unfairness right this
idea that you know there's this genetic
lottery that's unfolding and some people
win and some people lose and through no
fault of their own um someone who I love
um you know bitterly um you know isn't
going to be able to enjoy the things
like you know being able to you know see
her grandkids and you know just things
that I think you know you and I take for
granted that hey we're going to be able
to see into into old age and um as I got
older
>> I try I try not I try not to take that
entirely for granted but but yes I take
I take your point
>> you're you're you're a better person
than me is I think that
>> is this one of the conditions that you
is your mother's condition one of the
conditions that you test for right now
with orchid.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. We have
an entire category
>> monogenic or polygenic.
>> Uh it's a little complex like the entire
disorder but the you know the set of
conditions that we test for are the
monogenic forms of uh of retinitis
pigmenttosis. So we also screen for
monogenic forms of you know blindness,
deafness, a lot a lot of congenital uh
anomalies that are known. But the
important thing I think to understand is
like for cancer for example as a
category we we test for monogenic forms
of cancer but not all of cancer is
monogenic if that makes sense. Um to me
it seemed like the most important thing
for me as a as a future parent was that
I wanted to be able to um you know
minimize the chance that my child was
going to be affected um by you know what
affected my mom and what affects
unfortunately millions of people today.
Right? So right now it's like this
really horrible situation where these
people who have these genetic diseases
each of them are individually so rare
that uh pharma companies have no
incentive to design a cure. The market
is literally too small. That's why I was
so active. Embryo screening is faster,
more certain, more comprehensive than
waiting for a cure
>> and and more affordable. It's much more
affordable. Right. You're talking about
the price of, you know, consumer
electronics to be able to mitigate risk
for thousands of
>> which which reminds me I I failed to ask
one client's question which is what what
does the procedure cost for one for one
set of embryos.
>> Yeah. So it's um 2500 per embryo. So you
know just multiply that by the number of
embryos that uh you and your partner end
up creating.
>> Let's talk let's talk about the science
for for a minute. Right. So there's a
lot of scientific controversy about the
work you're doing. Um you a lot of
there's a lot of criticism and a lot of
skepticism
um not about the basic idea of genetic
screening but about both the specific
way you're doing it um and some of the
promised results. So I want to ask you
some of the questions that seem to come
up in that area. And the first has to do
with just the process that we've talked
about already of amplification where um
you know you're essentially copying a
full genome from a smaller a smaller
sample, right? And something that you
hear frequently is that this process
itself introduces errors that the genome
that is amplified is not going to be
identical to the actual genome of the
embryo. And so you are inevitably in
doing that kind of process going to
introduce um essentially potential error
levels and its own form of sort of dice
rolling and Russian roulette into the
test results that you get back. Um
what's what's your response to that
critique?
>> So it is true that older amplification
methods suffered from those issues. So
kind of the technical terms for these
are you know alil dropout and um you
know lack of uniformity of coverage but
basically you know what does that
actually mean? it means that you're not
getting a representative sample of um
the genome that you want. Right? But
that is that is sort of the core
technical problem, one of the core
technical problems that orchid solved.
And the reason how the the way that we
know that we've solved it is that we
take the exact same standards that are
used on blood and saliva and we've
exceeded those standards, right? And
we've actually gone, you know, a step
further than that. Um where we've
actually sequenced uh babies that have
been born. So, we've actually can
compare the embryo sample to the cord
blood and the the DNA of the baby at
birth. And we've shown that um you know
all of those results agree and that we
can uh reliably
um we can we can reliably read the
entire genome from that really small
sample.
>> To what extent are these results like
publicly available as opposed to
reflecting sort of proprietary corporate
um technological findings? Like can I
can I as can I as a journalist see those
results and take them to a geneticist
who's skeptical of you and sort of have
them read it? Like is that is that out
there?
>> Of course. Yeah, of course. Yeah, that
would be your right. So, um yeah, all of
these validations are public. They've
been peer- reviewviewed. Um they've all
we've also had um you know state and you
know federal level inspections come into
the lab to also review all of these
documents. Um that last piece around the
um outcome data is um is still in sort
of a preprint phase. Um so that means
that it's just going to be available
publicly in a few months before the end
of the year. Um but
>> so what is what is what is proprietary?
>> Yeah. So the amplification protocol as
well as the computational methods that
we use in order to um yeah basically
call variance and uh build these genetic
risk score models. So
>> so it's the risk so it's the risk score
that is essentially a trade secret. You
can't tell me how you generate the risk
score because a potential competitor
would come along and steal that method.
>> Well, what I'm saying is that both the
chemistry and the computational side is
proprietary. They're all sort of new
methods that we've um invented. So for
the chemistry side, we have a
provisional patent that we filed and for
the computational side um that's kind of
more in the trade secret category.
>> Yes. Okay. So let's let's talk about
then questions about polygenic testing,
right? and diseases that
>> are caused or influenced by multiple
genes. My understanding is that the
state of our actual knowledge of how the
genome works and influences things like
diseases is limited in all kinds of ways
and that there are sort of two sets of
open questions about this kind of
polygenic screening. First just to what
extent is it basically reliable and
second to what extent do we just not
know what other things a set of genes
might be doing right so you can imagine
a world where you look at an embryo and
you say ah it has this set of genes that
make it somewhat more likely to have
heart disease or Parkinson's we don't
want to use that embryo but then it
turns out that something in that set of
genes also codes for resistance to
disease or something like that right my
I think this concept is called pleotropy
the idea that a set of genes can have
different effects, right, in in the same
person. So, how does how does your
testing deal with both of those
realities? Like one, just sort of basic
uncertainty about how genes interact
with each other, and two, the idea that
you might be, you know, testing for one
condition and failing to capture some
other set of effects that would be
themselves lifelong and powerful.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Um, yeah, let's definitely
get into both of those concerns. So I
think what people are really asking when
they talk about plyotropy is this idea
of genetic trade-offs, right? So um you
know if you lower risk for
schizophrenia, are you actually
unknowingly increasing risk for another
condition? And one thing that I love
about genetics that is that it's become
a uh incredibly quantitative science. So
researchers, you know, not just at
Orchid but around the world have
actually looked into this exact
question. So what they do is they build
something called a confusion matrix. So
what that does is it's testing pair-wise
correlations uh between um schizophrenia
or any disease of interest and thousands
of other diseases right and the dominant
pattern in that data is that uh diseases
um actually that are of a similar
category correlate with each other. So
basically schizophrenia risk actually
correlates with risk for bipolar
disorder and other mental health
conditions. So what that means is that
this this idea of um genetic trade-offs
isn't the dominant story the data tells.
The dominant story the data tells is
actually that when you want to reduce
risk for a for mental health disorders,
you actually reduce risk for multiple
diseases simultaneously. Right? So heart
disease is is um you know has the most
correlation with things like atrial
fibrillation and other um cardiac
conditions. So it's not the case that
there's these um massive genenic
trade-offs um that uh we know of and
then it is the case that it happens in
um you know a small number of uh
specific situations you know those
correlations have been found but the
dominant story is actually that um
you're able to reduce risk for many
conditions in the same category at once
and I think that that's something that
is a really exciting uh discovery
because I think that you know that would
I I totally agree it's like it's a fear
that people have is that um you know am
I unknowingly reducing increasing risk
for
>> and and you're effectively saying it
could happen but it's not the most
likely scenario.
>> Yes. However, I would say that, you
know, the other kind of boogeyman
argument of like unknown unknowns, I
just don't find it very compelling
because if our standard for any medical
intervention was that, uh, you know,
we'd have to clear the bar for unknown
unknowns, we would never do anything,
right? Like, so when we when we, you
know, run a clinical trial for a drug
and, you know, we find that it's uh,
effective, we don't say, okay, but what
about in 50 years if this person like,
you know, self-destructs or like falls
down dead, right? Like there's a certain
standard that you know we've accepted is
a reasonable standard and what that
standard is is that hey in you know what
what genetic risk scores do is they
actually exceed the standard in all of
in all of uh medicine right talking
about
>> but that gets into
>> just one second the thing is the thing
is is that genetic risk scores
>> exceed the standard for you know any
drug that's currently on the market
right you have hundreds of thousands of
people that these scores have been
validated in you've validated these
scores not just in a single country but
across multiple countries, multiple
populations. Um, so I think it's very
difficult to argue from a quantitative
perspective that we cannot measure the
genetic predisposition to disease. We
have seen over and over again in many
different populations um across time now
that um you know we can quantify the
genetic susceptibility to disease. We
can see individuals who are four times,
three times, 15 times um 30 times the
likelihood um depending on which
genetics risk score that you're looking
at. And I think that that's um a much
stronger evidence set than than than we
have for blockbuster drugs.
>> But that but that gets but that gets to
that gets to my next question, right?
You mentioned the idea well you can't
you know the idea that you know at age
50 someone drops down dead is not you
know necessarily has to be central to
the calculation of any given
intervention. How do you know that your
interventions in some of these areas are
working given that some of the
conditions you're testing for don't
manifest themselves you know for years
or decades right so yes you have you
have a set of tests where you know if a
set of children are born through orchids
work and you know they all turn out to
have you know severe abnormalities you
could say okay this isn't working right
but when it comes to let's say
schizophrenia right like setting aside
all the difficult questions about what
actually causes schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia tends to manifest itself,
you know, often, you know, in late
teenage years, in people's 20s, right?
Like, you know, from our point of view,
an orchid baby born today who you're
trying to offer a polygenic risk score
for on schizophrenia might not manifest
schizophrenia until the year, you know,
2046,
right? So
how how you know isn't it going to be
decades before you will actually have
data to be able to say definitively our
risk assessments for these longerterm
conditions are working?
>> Uh no the way that we know that it's
working is that we already have data
from people who are alive today um who
have schizophrenia. we have data from
their families and what you can do is
you can you know run the model and see
how often are you able to identify that
risk in um in individuals and you can
actually go a step further and actually
look at um data within families. So what
that means is that you look at siblings
uh you look at you know data sets where
you have um you know multiple siblings
one is affected by a disease the other
one isn't affected by a disease and then
you can actually see okay how often um
is that risk score correct how often are
you able to reliably see that okay you
know this embryo is at this you know
individual uh developed the disease and
they also had a very high risk score and
what that data shows you again and again
and again this data isn't just um you
know work it alone this is like the
entire
uh genetics community has has published
these results is that um what these
genetic risk scores can do, how powerful
they are, is that they can identify
individuals that are anywhere from three
to you know six six to 30 times
depending on which which uh disease it
is that you're looking at. And um you
know that's the exact same framework
that we use again for clinical trials
for drugs, right? You look at cases and
you look at controls, people who were
treated with it with it with a drug and
people who weren't. How often is um how
often is the outcome that you're
measuring mitigated? Right? If you're
trying to mitigate heart attacks, how
different is the rate of heart attacks
in people who took the drug versus who
didn't? Similarly, in in the context of
genetic risk for people who have who are
who are who are um you know quantified
at high genetic risk versus people who
are at low genetic risk, how much more
often do the people at high genetic risk
um get the disease? And what you see
again over and over again across
populations is that that happens. Um so
basically it would be ridiculous to tell
people you know that hey we're going to
stop offering any drug because we have
to wait 50 years to see uh you know if
it if it if it continues to work if you
if it works in the uh population that
you studied you offer it because you
know it's clear that that it works based
on you know a reasonable standard.
>> But what you were promising right is
that you have again a proprietary
algorithm that is not publicly available
that assesses these risk levels. And
what tell me if I'm wrong, what you're
saying to me is that you are validating
this algorithm retrospectively by
saying, look, we've based it on, you
know, on tests of people and families
that have schizophrenia already. We
know, you know, we know when it
manifests and based on that, we are, you
know, we are able to project forward and
say this should work for the next set of
populations down the line. I I
completely accept that that's possible.
But again, the claim of a proprietary
algorithm, right, is that you have
you're doing something special that you
know, not not everyone else could do.
And you are making a prospective bet on
the effectiveness of that algorithm. You
can't prove it to me by saying, you
know, look, people who didn't go through
this testing, we promise you we've
matched the algorithm onto them. Right?
In the end, it will be a while before
the algorithm itself is vindicated,
right?
No, that's not how that's not how um
that's not how any medical test is
evaluated. Any medical test is evaluated
on existing data and uh you proceed
assuming that existing data is valid,
right? So, um for example, a drug
company doesn't go and tell you, hey,
this is exactly the molecule and this
is, you know, the propri I mean, of
course, they patent it. Um they show you
the results and we publish the results,
too. we for for every single risk score
that um you know that it's offered we
forgive me if I'm confused but but what
I'm saying is when when a drug company
>> gives you know tests a drug they're
testing it on people you know they're
treating a cancer and they give the drug
to people with cancer and some of the
people with cancer get better and some
of them don't and they can say we gave
these people
>> this test these people you know over the
course of our process manifested these
results you with an algorithm them
that's being applied to embryos. You
don't get those results until the person
actually develops or doesn't develop
schizophrenia. That's all I'm saying.
Right? If you're comparing the way a
drug is tested, it's not just looking
back at people in the past who have had
cancer, you are actually giving it to
people and seeing what happens,
>> right? And you are giving you are
running a test on you on on embryos and
claiming and making a set of predictions
about where the embryos go. And I I
completely buy that you're trying to
make those predictions based on existing
data and that it might be possible to
make those predictions. All I'm saying
is you won't have the equivalent of
clinical trial data for some of these
conditions for a long time. That's all
I'm saying. Is that wrong?
>> I think it's a it's a bit misleading,
right? Because the difference is that,
you know, we're not giving embryos
drugs, right? What is it? What are we
evaluating about embryos? We're
evaluating their DNA. So, the DNA of
existing people is a perfectly
legitimate uh way to evaluate whether or
not a risk score works. And
>> you're not giving the embryos drugs.
You're just discarding the ones that you
I mean, in a way, you're doing something
more extreme to them, right? You're
saying you're discarding them.
>> No, we're not discarding any embryo. I
mean, or orchid has absolutely zero to
do with uh discard. We provide genetic
reports and parents make their own own
decisions about um you know which embryo
they want to implant and whether they
want to discard it. Orchid actually
advises against discarding any embryo
for for any reason. So yeah, we have
absolutely nothing to do with discard.
>> Okay, that's that's a good bridge to
some moral questions I have. But before
we cross that bridge, I just want to ask
you about IVF itself because right now
IVF for a lot of women is painful. It's
difficult. It's expensive and it's
something that people only really seek
out in many cases when they're facing
serious fertility challenges. You're
imagining a future where IVF becomes, if
not the normal, at least a normal way to
have kids. So, does IVF itself need to
change in some way for that future to be
possible?
>> No, I actually don't think so. I think
that well, from my personal experience,
I had um you know, zero side effects. I
took zero days off work. It was um
extremely um uh I mean it was like a
non-event to be totally honest. I mean I
think that you know some people have you
know really heavy periods and it like
you know ruins their their whole day or
week. IVF itself I think was um it's
it's pretty simple right? I mean you're
you're taking medication for 10 days.
The results the results were um amazing.
And I think that if you think about you
know what people already do for trivial
reasons. I mean people get Botox, people
get, you know, um plastic surgery,
people do, you know, much more invasive
things that are that are, you know, more
expensive for really trivial gain,
right? This is talking about is your
child going to suffer for a lifetime
from a disease that you could have
prevented? Are you going to spend two
weeks um to make sure that you know that
doesn't happen? I think that a lot of
parents would choose that, right? So
this this question has actually already
been asked you know nationally to
Americans and 70% of Americans um are in
support of using um you know these types
of uh you know genetic risk scores to
actually understand risk before
pregnancy and actually 30% of Americans
um you know would consider IVF uh in
order to mitigate risk. And if you think
about the costs, I mean, the costs are
just like artificially inflated in the
US, right? I mean, in Europe, you can
get IVF plus the medication for less
than um $5,000.
>> I I think one should be skeptical of
applying the answer to a poll question
>> to the way people actually make choices
about these things in real life. And I
think one should be skeptical about
applying your experience. And I'm glad
that it was as easy as it was for you to
the experiences of the wider range of
women because I would say just from sort
of personal knowledge, there are a lot
of different experiences with IVF. I
would also just note, you know, you
haven't actually had a child, right? So
you're describing sort of part of the
IVF process as having been incredibly
simple for you, but there's another part
which is trying to actually get pregnant
through it.
>> Sure. But the data shows that if you
have three chromosomally normal embryos,
you have a 95% chance of a successful
pregnancy. And that's from data on
thousands and thousands of cycles. And I
think that yes, I I don't want to, you
know, diminish that people have really
rough and difficult IVF experiences, but
I think there's a difference between
what is the practicalities of what needs
to be done. You need to take shots for
10 days and do a 10-minute procedure to
extract your eggs and then battling with
infertility. Battling infertility is
like equivalent to battling cancer. I
don't want to diminish that. That's a
very difficult thing that people have to
go through. But the question is, you
know,
>> right, for the healthy the healthy back
to the client, the healthy 30-year-old
who isn't infertile as as far as we
know, right? You're you're saying that a
certain amount of modest pain and
challenge is worth it for the benefits
that that you describe.
>> For me, for me personally and for people
who choose this, it's not, you know,
again, no one should be compelled to do
something that they that they personally
find um you know, you know, the wrong
decision for their family. If you look
at the history of medical innovation in
pregnancy, I mean you see this over and
over, right? So when epidural was first
introduced, there was this massive moral
panic. People were were told that hey,
you know, women have to endure pain uh
during pregnancy. You know, we shouldn't
remove it. We shouldn't overmedicalize
it. And now, you know, it's completely
standard. I mean, 70% of women choose an
epidural when they deliver their baby,
right? If you think about hospital birth
versus uh home birth, right? It used to
be that everyone gave birth at home. Now
98% of Americans choose to give birth in
a hospital. Why did they do that? Right?
When you're hemorrhaging, you have an
intervention they were able to do that's
life-saving in the hospital that you
don't have access to at home. Right? So
I think for the same reasons, people are
going to vote with their feet where they
think the better outcomes are. And I
think that there's this huge knowledge
gap where people think that um you know,
genetic disease, you know, maybe won't
affect them or isn't as prevalent as it
actually is. And if people really
understood, hey, you know, developmental
delay, intellectual disability, autism,
pediatric cancer, birth defects, all
these really horrible things. Actually,
we now understand the molecular basis of
it. Um, I think people are going to vote
with their feed and say, "Hey, yeah, you
know, two weeks of injections. Yeah,
it's annoying. I would, you know, you
know, that's something I that is a
hurdle that I would rather
>> the payoff is worth it."
>> But people don't just people don't just
vote with their feet in terms of how
medical processes work, right? Like so
the United States has a very very high
rate of cesarian sections for instance
which are not necessarily medically
indicated um but have become sort of a
source of convenience and pressure from
doctors and so on right that has I think
in certain ways warped the experience of
childbearing in the US right and I think
it's becomes easy to see a scenario
where you know you you get a certain
kind of medical pressures and
expectations that push people towards
you know doing the kind of interventions
you're describing because of you know
again I agree no one is going to be
locked in a room and told they have to
do this right but you can end up with
certain kind of medical systems creating
pressures for things that aren't
necessarily just people making free
choices and voting for their feet that
voting with their feet both things can
happen people make choices but the
system imposes certain expectations
right and I think it's very likely in a
future where
the orchid process becomes a kind of
norm that you would then get a whole set
of medical pressures like what are you a
bad parent you're not going to you know
you're not going to test your kids and
so on right like you could imagine a
kind of tipping point or a cascade where
you go from this is sort of a choice
that a certain number of parents do to
this is the expectation that the medical
system imposes on expectant parents um
which is why I think it's important to
think about some of the moral questions
and cultural questions, right,
associated with this kind of change. Um
because one can
>> Yeah, I just I I just I just want I just
want to I just want to maybe like uh uh
agree with you and push back on that. I
think that um I think maybe it's a sort
of a universal opinion that there's um
you know too much uh you know finger
wagging at women. I think that women are
attacked if they choose to breastfeed. I
think they're attacked if they choose
not to breastfeed. I think that they're
attacked if they you know want to have a
lot of kids. I think they're attacked if
they don't want to have kids. And I
think that all of that societal pressure
whether it's um you know cultural or
whether it's from the medical
establishment um you know needs to needs
to stop honestly I think that you know
this should really be about um you know
parental choice parental freedom and
parental autonomy. So I think that you
know I I totally agree with you. I think
that for any intervention um or for any
you know procedure that's touching
something so intimate and so personal it
should be about um you know just making
an informed decision where people are
just told honestly hey this is what is
possible um these are the you know risks
and benefits and then they make a they
make a decision that's right for their
family. So totally agree with you there
that like there shouldn't be pressure
from the medical establishment one way
or the other.
>> Good. Uh let's let's talk about some of
the moral and societal questions that I
think this tech raises. Um start with a
basic one, right? Orchid technology
relative to having babies by having sex
involves creating substantial numbers of
embryos. Many of those embryos will not
be used. They'll be kept on ice. They'll
eventually be discarded. This is
something Americans are comfortable with
in under sort of existing the existing
IVF system, but they're comfortable with
it in a context where most of the people
who are doing this are struggling with
infertility and are in a kind of, you
know, crisis environment. What you're
talking about is, you know, doing this
at a much much larger scale. So, I just
have to ask, do you think the embryos
that are created uh in the orchid
process have any kind of moral status
whatsoever?
>> I think that embryos are um extremely
precious. I mean, they're the most
miracul miraculous and like magical
cells that we've um I think ever
discovered, right? I mean, they somehow
differentiate, you know, into the
trillions of cells that make, you know,
you and I.
>> Um but I think that something that is
unfortunately I think a lot of people
don't understand biology. So what
happens the oldfashioned way, right? A
lot of embryos are discarded through
that process. Nature is extremely
brutal, right? So a lot of people don't
know that, you know, even people in
their 20s, they have about a 20% chance
of getting pregnant every month, right?
So yes, an egg can fertilize, right?
Great. Now you have an embryo, but that
doesn't mean an embryo is going to
implant. So at the natural process at
home, you know, there's been multiple um
you know, really large scale studies on
this. Um you know, lots of embryos are
discarded at home. It's just that IVF
makes that process visible that is
currently invisible to people that's
happening at home.
>> That's but that's not true. So the term
discard implies agency.
>> If you and your spouse Okay, fine.
The what the difference, the obvious
difference between embryos that fail to
implant when a husband and a wife have
sex and embryos that are discarded in a
laboratory is that in the first case,
the embryo dies with no human being
deciding that it's going to die. And in
the second case, the embryo dies because
the laboratory decided it should die. In
the same way, all human all human beings
all human beings die over a long enough
time horizon. everyone's survival rate
is zero. But if you had a system that
was set up that required discarding
hundreds and thousands, hundreds of
thousands of adult human beings, we
wouldn't say, "Oh, everybody dies.
Mother nature is much more cruel,
right?" Like, in order for your argument
to work, you just have to say the embryo
doesn't have any moral status that we're
obliged to respect and therefore it's
okay to discard it. All this talk about,
you know, mother nature, I think, is a
distraction from that from that issue. I
think I think that your framing is I
think that your framing is dishonest and
I want to tell you why it's dishonest.
You can take embryos that have been
created through IVF and you can transfer
them back into the mom if you really
want to make it not a a human choice
whether or not those embryos become
babies or not. Yes.
>> And then and then it's and then it is
exactly equivalent and many people
choose to uh transfer those embryos into
um mom. It's called compassionate uh
transfer and they don't take the IVF
meds and there's a you know very low
chance that that's going to become a
pregnancy just like you know when you
and your partner at home um do it the
oldfashioned way that there's times of
the month that that that that it's that
it's not going to lead to a pregnancy.
>> I I completely I actually completely
agree with you. I think those are quite
it is quite different to transfer
embryos into a woman's body when they
have a really low chance of survival
than it is to discard or permanently
freeze and then forget about existing
embryos. Right. Which do you think is
most likely to happen at scale in a
world where orchid technology takes off?
compassionate
uh the the compassionate method you
describe which does have some chance of
leading to pregnancy or millions upon
millions of embryos just being
discarded.
>> Isn't it clearly clearly it's the
latter? Right.
>> So so what I would say is that it's it's
overly simplistic to uh to say that
everyone is going to make the same
decision. Maybe people maybe a lot of
people really want to do compassionate
transfer. Maybe that becomes the default
way that um you know embryos are
handled. It really depends on people's
personal decisions. I think it what the
bottom line is is like we shouldn't be
shoving our moral beliefs on other
people. If you believe that you want
your embryos to be frozen indefinitely
because you believe in this, you know,
future where sci-fi is going to be able
to, you know, provide gene therapy on
those embryos, more power to you. If you
feel very strongly that, you know, every
embryo is a human life and you want to
do compassionate transfer, then you
should have full right to do that. Um so
I don't think we I don't think we should
be making assumptions about what choices
people will make because when you stand
in that position then you know like when
people are actually in that decision uh
in that moment they'll make a you know
potentially decision that would surprise
you.
>> Okay. But you you are promoting a
technology
>> that has profoundly potentially
transformative effects on society.
Clearly, you're arguing for it because
it has beneficial effects and you are
essentially saying you don't know what's
going to happen to all the extra
embryos. Who can possibly say it's just
up to people? We know in practice what
is likely to happen, right? And I feel
like I feel like I'd like to know what
you think about the moral status of the
embryo. Isn't that something I should I
should be able to know? Like just to
take just to go back to the example you
talked about, right, with with your
mother and her illness, right?
>> In the world you're describing, your
mother would exist as an embryo, right?
Not not your mother as an adult human
being. Your mother as an embryo and
someone running an orchid style program
would look at that embryo and say,
"We're not going to implant that
embryo." Does that bother you at all?
Would you say, "Oh, I'd like to have my
mother have a chance at life through
some kind of low probability
um compassionate injection." Are you
comfortable with the with that embryo
being frozen or discarded? What's your
actual view?
>> Look, that question has again extremely
dis uh dishonest framing and dichomous
reasoning. So, let me just walk you
through my grandma's life situation. So,
do you support women or girls getting
the chance to finish high school? Do you
support girls getting the chance to
choose uh who they marry and when they
marry? Right. Well, my
>> grand somebody's doing some dishonest
framing here, but I don't think it's me.
>> No, no, I don't think it's dishonest
framing. And I think that that's that is
the actual situation that my grandmother
was was in. She was um you know, married
at 16 and had my mom at 17. Right now,
we've progressed as a society and we
give girls the choice to finish high
school. We give women the choice to
choose when they marry and who they
marry. And all of those decisions have
profound consequences on who gets born.
Different people are getting born
because girls are finishing a high
school. Different people are getting
born every time a woman rejects a man on
a first date. So, I think it's it's
ridiculous
to bring embryos into being. I'm asking
about the embryos themselves. You're
running a business and you're saying it
would be good to live in a society where
the embryo that became my mother was
assessed and ruled out of bounds. And
I'm just asking you what the actual
status of that embryo is. Does it does
it matter? Is it you know like if I if I
took the trays of embryos that contain
you and your husband's embryionic
children and I threw them in the river,
what kind of crime have I committed?
Have I committed a property crime? like
should I pay a fine? Like what have I
done?
>> So are you saying that you want to
criminalize IVF and that you should ban
IVF? Is that
>> I'm I'm asking I mean look I I have
convictions on abortion and IVF that are
generally out of step with the
mainstream of America and I completely
own that. I would say no. I don't want
no I don't want to ban IVF but I think
there should be limits on the number of
embryos created. Absolutely. And I would
favor at least at a level of sort of
moral persuasion encouraging the kind of
um you know compassionate what's the
term you use? Compassionate.
>> It's called compassionate transfer.
>> Compassionate transfer. I would I would
support that. So if I I've answered your
question now I'd like you to tell me
does the embryo have any moral status?
That's all I'm asking.
>> Sure. I think that uh the question of
okay an embryo that is going to get
adult onset blindness. What do I think
about that embryo? Um, my mom doesn't
want to be blind. She doesn't want me to
be blind. She doesn't want her grandkids
to be blind. So, I think that it is a
positive moral choice. It is the
responsible decision as a parent to
detect that risk at the earliest
possible stage and to um, you know,
transfer the embryo that has the best
probability of a healthy life. Um, I
don't think that there's any moral
question there. I think almost the
opposite. But I think that creating
stigma or creating some sort of um taboo
around the idea that parents would want
to proactively get that information is
um is is a dangerous um idea to
propagate. Um for me personally, I do
think every single embryo is um
precious. I think it's yeah, I think
it's it's an absolutely amazing thing
that we're able to to make this process
work outside of the bo outside of the
body. And um you know it would be
amazing if we had you know cures for all
of these genetic diseases so we didn't
have to make these difficult decisions
but unfortunately like medicine is just
not very good right we do not have cures
for these diseases. My mom has no
options for uh being able to reverse the
the the vision loss.
>> All right I've badgered you on this
point enough. Two last questions. The
first is uh about the kind of sci-fi
dystopian future that a lot of people
see hanging around this issue. And it
relates to the fact that I think most
people's expectation is that if you can
figure out what polygenic scores mean
for diseases, you're going to be able to
for athleticism, intelligence, to say
nothing of a whole host of superficial
traits, right? So, in which case, if you
have a set of genetic technologies that
cost a certain amount of money, I think
you quoted me a price of $25,000, right?
You are one
>> 2500
>> per embryo, right? 2500 per embryo. you.
If this technology works as well as you
say it does, then you are essentially
advancing towards a future where you
know there will be a cast system in
terms of how rich people versus poor
people are genetically sculpting their
offspring. Um is your view that you are
ushering in that kind of future?
>> No, I don't think so. And I think that
um society, you know, fundamentally
rejects that idea because it is uh you
know, fundamentally so disgusting,
right? I think that um I think that, you
know, we're moving toward a world where
um IVF itself is something that is going
to hopefully be covered for everyone.
It's really it's a really sad history, I
think, for the last 40 years that, you
know, rich people get to have babies and
um poor people who don't who can't
afford IVF don't get to. That's sort of
a fundamental human right that I think
was violated. And I think it's nice that
we're we're finally seeing steps toward
that being corrected where everyone uh
you know will be able to have uh access
to IVF. And I think in addition to that
um hopefully we'll be able to get access
to screening technologies uh like
orchid. I think that um because it spurs
such moral outrage this idea that
something that would create such an
advantage such a you know vastly
different outcomes. I don't think that's
something that uh Americans will choose
to um only leave to um you know the few
that can afford it. I think it's
something that um in the very near near
future um you know hopefully we'll you
know be able to mobilize enough um you
know um you know excitement around so
that it's something that's going to be
covered for everyone. So essentially you
need a kind of socialism to avoid the
sort of
>> genetic hierarchy eugenic. No I right. I
mean that's
>> I think it's just insurance coverage. I
mean it's insurance coverage for a very
nominal amount right. We're currently
covering um you know in the last you
know year of your life or the last you
know two weeks of your life um extremely
expensive you know life support machines
and medical procedures that are
extending your life by a few days. I
think that even today with the money
that we have today um you know if we
spent it uh more appropriately if we
spent it more in line with what people's
actual preferences are um we could
already afford this for everyone in
America today.
>> Okay.
>> It's just it's just a question of will,
right? That's why I'm so excited to talk
to you.
>> Will and budget and budget deficits. But
but yes. All right. The last a last
question. You are excited about a world
in which lots and lots more babies than
is the case right now are born from
laboratory fertilization.
And I'm just curious if you think, you
know, allowing that this might be
desirable in certain cases if a world
where this became the norm would be
losing something that is very
fundamental to human beings and human
families and human relationships. And
that's the relationship between sex and
procreation, between you and your
husband having sex. Apologies. um and
the future generations that come that
come into being. And I'm going to take
the podcasters's privilege. I apologize
for this, but I'm going to read you a
piece of a poem. It's by a poet named
Gway Canel. And the poem is called after
making love, we hear footsteps. And the
idea is sort of contained in the title
that the husband and wife make love and
it wakes up their child and the child
comes and gets in bed with them. And
Canel writes, "In the half darkness, we
look at each other and smile and touch
arms across this little startlingly
muscled body. This one whom habit of
memory propels to the ground of his
making. Sleeper only the mortal sounds
can sing awake.
This blessing love gives again into our
arms. Sorry.
Do you worry about removing or
diminishing from human experience
that aspect of being a husband and a
wife in a relationship with a child?
>> What do you mean?
>> I mean in your future the feeling in the
in a future where orchid technology
becomes a norm. The feeling that that
poet is expressing where a man and a
woman make love and by making love they
bring a new life into the world that
they haven't sculpted or engineered in
any way that is given to them out of the
self-giving from each other. That that
forms this profound connection between
sex, the way you love your partner and
the family that you brought into being.
And again, this, you know, allowing that
we're in a world where people have
genetic disorders and there are all
kinds of reasons that people would
consider other ways of having children.
You're imagining a future where that
just sort of goes away. And I'm
wondering if you think anything would
actually be lost if that goes away. If
90% of babies are born through IVF and
having sex and having a baby out of that
becomes this weird thing that the Amish
do, aren't you pushing
some really intimate and important
aspect of human experience out of human
experience?
>> Yeah, I think people will, you know,
obviously continue to have sex. I mean,
it's it's a profound source of
connection. I think it's just that
people will I mean, it's actually funny.
I mean, this quote that I've that I've
said of, you know, sex is for fun,
orchid, and embryo screening is for
babies. It's actually
>> I didn't want to quote that to you
because I thought it was so ridiculous,
but go on.
>> I I actually don't I think it's already
true. I mean, already people are having
sex much more often than they're having
babies. Sex is already for fun and not
for babies, you know, 99% of the time.
So, it's actually not so so strange of a
of a
but when you get But when you But wait,
wait. But when you get a baby, most
people get it
>> from having sex. And
>> so it's yes, there is there's plenty of
people who have sex without having
babies, but most people who get a baby,
it is linked inextricably to having sex
with your spouse.
>> And that's and you are saying and you're
saying it's time to sever that for the
sake I concede of potential medical
benefits. I'm just saying I think pretty
clearly something that like poets write
about would go away.
Yeah, I think that sex is a beautiful
thing and I think that if you have, you
know, enormous genetic privilege and for
you to roll the dice and to get a um,
you know, outcome that isn't going to
lead to disease is is in the cards for
you, then of course, you know, go ahead
and and uh, you know, roll the dice.
It's just that I think that the vast
majority of parents in the future are
not going to want to roll the dice with
their child's health. They're going to
see it as, you know, taking the maximum
amount of care, the maximum amount of
love in the same way that they, you
know, plan their nursery, plan their
home, plan their preschool. All of these
decisions are actually um, you know,
extremely insignificant uh, in terms of
the difference between is your child
going to live with pediatric cancer,
with um, a heart defect that we can't
surgically fix, with born without a
skull and never going to be able to make
it to their first birthday. I think when
people think about it really concretely
in terms of what are they giving up,
what are the risks that could
potentially um affect this child. I
think that then it becomes about
stewardship, it be you know it becomes
about how do I make a responsible uh
choice for my family? How do I make sure
that um you know my child doesn't have
to suffer in the same way that I do in
the same way that my sibling does in the
same way that um you know my my my
parent that I'm a caregiver for does. So
I I mean I I think sex is obviously a
very beautiful thing. It's a very
profound part of the human experience,
but I think that it's um yeah, I think
it's, you know, denigrating and
dismissive to IVF parents and IVF babies
to say that somehow, you know, science
babies are um you know, inferior to to
babies that are, you know, made the
oldfashioned way. I mean, every human
life is equally valid. And I think, you
know, no parent who chooses to take the
maximum amount of love and care and
information going into that decision
should be um you know, stigmatized in
any way. I think it's their personal
choice. And you know, I think freedom
and choice is, you know, what makes
America, you know, a great place to to
live and to and to be.
>> Nor Sadiki, thank you so much for
joining me.
>> Thank you so much for having me. It was
it was an awesome discussion.
[Music]